So that was a lot of information about if
and it is an important field
because being able to run steps
and jobs conditionally is important.
But we don't just have if,
we also have the special continue-on-error field
and I also wanna show you what this field does.
Now to show you what it does
and to also see a comparison to the if field.
I'll copy the execution flow file
and name it, continue yml.
And now in here what I'll do
is I will remove this upload test report if check here
and instead here on the run tests step,
I will add the special continue-on-error field
and set this to true.
Now we could also use an expression here
to derive the value dynamically
but this is often something which you wanna hard code
because typically you know whether this step
should not block other steps
from executing even if it fails,
because that's what continue-on-error does.
If you add it like this,
if you set it to true you are saying that
the job should continue execution
even if that step fails.
So the next step and also the next jobs thereafter
will still be executed even if that step failed,
that's what continue-on-error does.
And that might sound similar to adding a if check here,
but you'll see that it's not the same.
And to show you that it's not the same
I will break my test again by removing that A
and I will add a new commit,
create a new commit.
Broke tests, added continue-on-error, and then push this.
Now we can take a look at our actions
and we now got two workflows running here
because we added two workflow files with the same name,
which actually can be confusing,
I'll change this actually right now,
but we'll still see the difference.
I'll name this, continue website development
since it's about continue-on-error.
But nonetheless, here we will see that both workflows ran
and we'll see a difference between these workflows.
But I'll wait for these workflows to finish
to show you what the difference is.
So now both workflows finished
and you can already see that one of them succeeded
and the other one failed.
And keep in mind, these workflows were triggered
based on the same commit and all we changed
is that we added continue-on-error
and removed the if check on upload test report.
Now the workflow that failed is the old workflow,
which we worked on before.
There, the test code step failed
and therefore the upload test report step was executed
because of our if check.
But since test code failed,
the overall job still counts as failed
and the other jobs, build and deploy, were skipped.
Because we only executed upload test report conditionally
but this does not change the result that a step failed
and therefore the overall job failed.
Now the other workflow succeeded despite
test code producing an error,
you see the error here as well
but you see that we have a check mark here
because we added continue-on-error to that step
This line of code here.
So the workflow that succeeded overall
is the workflow that has this line
because continue-on-error does just what the name implies,
it treats this step as a success
despite its technically failing
because we're basically overriding that
by telling GitHub Actions that
even if we have an error here
we want to continue and treat this as successful.
That's why the next step in line executes
even without an if condition,
because this step didn't fail officially.
And all the other jobs also execute
because again, test didn't fail
because test code officially didn't fail,
that's the difference here.
And that's also the part
where this conclusion and outcome value
becomes important.
You might remember that's the value we were able
to access on a single step with help of the steps context.
Now the conclusion field simply tells us
whether the job is treated as a success
after continue-on-error was evaluated.
And typically that will be success
because continue-on-error has the goal
of treating the step as a success even if it failed.
Now it could still fail for technical reasons
if the runner somehow crashes
and you could still manually cancel the job,
and it could also be skipped
if there was some if condition attached to the step,
if that caused the step to not even be started
but in most cases you will get success here.
Now, outcome on the other hand is the value
before continue-on-error was evaluated.
Therefore, as it also says down here,
when continue-on-error is set to true,
outcome can be failure but the final conclusion
is still success.
And that's in the end what we had here in our example
and that's what continue-on-error does.
So should you use continue-on-error or if?
That's the big question.
And the answer is it depends,
it depends on what your goals are.
If you want your entire workflow to continue,
even if that step fails, sure, use continue-on-error.
If on the other hand you just wanna run
some selected other steps or jobs
and not the overall workflow,
use if checks as we did it before instead.